What's the Diff? Version Control and Revision Reflections
=========================================================

[Chapter Description]{.smallcaps}

Reflection is often framed as something that happens only at the end of
a writing project, but as process research has demonstrated, writers
make important decisions throughout. This essay recommends that writers
use digital tools to keep track of what's changing -- and, when
possible, to include a quick note with each major change, saying what
they're trying to achieve. Such a revisitable version history helps to
make writers' revision strategies more visible and available to
metacognition, without relying solely on hindsight. The essay further
suggests that a broadening set of revision "moves" is likely to be one
learning outcome of a successful writing course. Examples are drawn from
the author's own use of GitHub Desktop, Google Docs, and Microsoft Word
in drafting this essay.

[Chapter]{.smallcaps}

*"Version control. Always. Everywhere. For everything."\
-- Karl Stolley, "The Lo-Fi Manifesto 2.0"*

Do you ever wonder what you're supposed to learn in a writing class? And
please don't just say "to write": if there's one thing we've found in
the last sixty years or so of research on writing, it's that writing
situations are incredibly varied; there is no one thing called "how to
write" that anyone can pick up in 15 weeks, or a year. Dr. E. Shelley
Reid, a stand-out teacher of writing teachers, has made the case that
we're really working on *how to deal with writing problems*: how to
identify them, some strategies to try for the ones we know, and the
confidence to keep trying even if a problem hasn't gone away. Because
the truth is, even expert, professional writers face writing problems.
(And solving one problem often introduces a new one.) It's just that
some people have more practice in surmounting them.

I'm not going to recap Reid's whole argument (though I do highly
recommend her *Writing Spaces* essay on "Ten Metaphors for Writing").
Suffice it to say, one skillset you should build over the course of a
writing class is a widening set of *revision strategies*: different ways
to step into a draft and take it to the next level. In this essay, I'll
argue that studying the differences between drafts---your revision
histories, or diffs---is a great way to find out what revision
strategies you're already using, and which ones you have yet to try.

I'm taking the phrase "revision strategies" from one of the classic
studies of writing processes, by Nancy Sommers. By comparing early and
late drafts, she found that beginning student writers tended to make
changes at the level of word, phrase, and sentence, and that most of the
word/phrase changes were substitutions: they didn't change the overall
structure or meaning. Experienced adult writers made those changes, too,
but also tended to go beyond---they made more changes at
larger-than-paragraph levels, like theme or section, and they did a lot
more cutting and reordering.

There's more to it than the mechanics: the differences here point to
different understandings of why we're revisiting the piece in the first
place. If we're mostly swapping out one synonym for another, then the
problem we're solving is probably about polish and presentation. That
approach can be useful for adapting to or shaping our audience, and so
I'd never say that changes smaller than the sentence aren't
important---but there are other problems that revision can address.
Movement often signals deeper thinking, or re-thinking, because it's a
reconfiguration of what we thought we were doing in the earlier draft.
For example, we might realize that an idea we'd come to only at the end
of a paragraph or page really ought to come earlier (reordering); in
that new position it may trigger new connections (addition in the middle
of the draft, not just at the end). Whole paragraphs that lead in
different directions might now cease to be relevant (subtraction), or
might need new transitions to make sense (substitution of whole
sentences, not just phrases).

Where do you find yourself on that spectrum? When you have to revisit a
first draft, do you look for ways to "clean it up"? Or do you ask
yourself what else, what next idea or better explanation, the draft
helps you figure out?

What do you think your revision history would have to say about it?

Making Change Visible
---------------------

There are lots of ways to see what's changed between drafts. Both
Microsoft Word and LibreOffice have built-in functions to compare two
documents, which will highlight new or changed lines and show deleted
ones in strikethrough format. In recent versions of Word, you can even
selectively focus on non-formatting changes (or, if you prefer, solely
formatting changes). One nice thing about this feature is that it can be
purely retroactive. That is, you don't need to plan ahead for it, so
long as you have two different files: a first submission vs. a final
draft, say. (I'll confess I've sometimes used this tool to see what's
changed in subsequent drafts turned in to me, both as a teacher and as
an editor, even when the authors didn't make a point of doing so for
themselves. If you expect that your teachers or editors might do the
same, you might as well get out ahead of them and see what they're going
to see.)

![A word processor window showing tracked changes. A central paragraph
displays inserted and deleted text, as well as unmodifed text; the
paragraphs just before and after show only inserted
text.](media/image1.tif){width="6.5in" height="3.7020833333333334in"}

Figure 1. Microsoft Word\'s \"compare documents\" feature is located in
the Tools menu, under \"track changes.\" Screenshot by the author of his
own document.

Even if this is all you take away from this essay, that may be enough to
repeat the Sommers experiment for yourself. Compare two drafts of
something you wrote before your writing course: what kinds of changes
did you make, and where? Try it again at the end (or even the midpoint)
of a writing course: how have your changes changed?

One potential problem with the compare-two-files approach, though, is
that a lot of changes happen *between* submissions. If you're only
saving a file as "draft" and "final," there's a good chance you're
saving over the many revision steps you took in the process of getting
to the version you turn in or send out. You could try to get around this
by saving lots of interim drafts under separate names, but that makes
for a lot of clutter in your file system---I think my 10-page
dissertation proposal got up to something like "draft 23" before I
finally submitted it---on top of which, all that duplication starts to
eat away at your hard drive space.

A more robust solution is a *version control system*, or VCS. A VCS is
software specifically designed to efficiently store and display the
whole history of a project, including the diffs between points in that
history. You get to keep the same filename throughout. (Or, if you
change the filename, that change is itself stored as a diff.) If you've
written with Google Docs, you've had one kind of VCS at work: it saves
changes every time you pause, down to the second, and lets you browse
through those changes. (Look for Version History under the File menu.)

![A diff in Google Docs. A centered paragraph is unchanged; the
paragraph above it has been deleted and re-inserted below. In a sidebar
with several steps in the revision history, the highlighted step reads,
\"reorder paragraphs - sommers in second paragraph. (but thesis comes
too late?)\"](media/image2.tif){width="6.5in"
height="4.8277777777777775in"}

Figure 2. The version history tool in Google Docs stores all edits, and
allows you to restore old versions, or just review them. Text that was
moved is shown as having been deleted in one position and inserted
somewhere else. Screenshot by the author of his own document.

Wikis, too, store a history of each edit, in part so editors can recover
text that shouldn't have been deleted. (And isn't it easier to make our
own hard cuts when you know you have that safety net just in case?)

![A screenshot of a cell phone Description automatically
generated](media/image3.tif){width="6.5in"
height="4.8590277777777775in"}

Figure 3. Wikipedia, like other wikis, makes \"view history\" a
prominent feature, and allows you to \"undo\" edits (though this action
is represented as its own new edit: the history remains.) Screenshot by
the author, of Wikipedia contributors.

The terminology of version "control" comes from computer programming,
where it's a mainstay of collaborative projects that continue to evolve
after they've been published. The VCS helps contributors get up to speed
on what's happened before, and prevents them from haphazardly
overwriting each other's work. But version control is just as helpful
for a solo project. When I've had to spend some time away from a piece
of writing, flipping through the project history helps me reacquaint
myself with the directions I'd been heading in, recovering momentum in a
different way than just reading through the current draft can offer.

For writers who use Google Docs, there's even a browser extension that
helps you with that recap. Called Draftback (http://draftback.com/), it
gathers up all your revisions, from the smallest deletion of an extra
space to the largest chunk of new text, and plays them back as a movie.
As their promotional copy puts it, the effect is "like going back in
time to look over your own shoulder as you write." Dr. Elizabeth
Chamberlain, a scholar of digital writing practices, has written that
using Draftback helps her students reflect on their writerly choices
more vividly and concretely. (If you haven't been asked by your writing
teacher to reflect on a project, you'll almost certainly be asked soon.)

One thing Draftback makes especially clear is that for most people, no
matter the number of revision moves in your repertoire, they don't tend
to happen in a set order: it's not all the new text first, then all the
editing later. Even individual sentences are usually written by a
looping path, five words added in and two words taken out, revised on
the fly as the thought comes clearer when you're trying to express it.
Not every sentence is hard-won like this; sometimes we can get into a
flow and think in whole paragraphs at a time. But if you look at enough
diffs, at a fine enough scale, I suspect you'll find that even your
"first thoughts" are revised thoughts. And that difference from a "first
thought, best thought" mindset should free you to revisit and rethink
even later on.

I noticed something curious in looking through my own Draftbacks. Places
where things got tricky would play out for several seconds, long enough
to read them, but major chunks of text would appear or disappear during
playback in the blink of an eye. Why? It turns out every edit---whether
a word or a paragraph---is treated as one change, and given equal time
on screen. Because it doesn't play the process back in real time (or
else we'd be watching it for days, weeks, or more!), Draftback doesn't
*pause.* Where it seems to do so, it's really showing multiple changes
concentrated in the same part of the text. This is great for identifying
stuckpoints, which can certainly be helpful to reflect on---I realized,
for example, that I was often working and reworking the transitions
between paragraphs in those moments of lingering diffs. But it actually
makes it hard to see the breakthroughs, which are just as important, if
not more.

This is why, as great as Google Docs can be, I started using something
else for my own files: git, GitHub, and especially GitHub Desktop.

Making a Commitment to Save Reflectively
----------------------------------------

Remember when I said that version control is a mainstay of collaborative
computer programming? This is the ecosystem designed especially for that
purpose: *git* is a lightweight program that keeps track of changes
across all the files within a given folder on your computer; *GitHub* is
a website that can synchronize or merge files and revision histories
between git-tracked folders on your local computer and a centralized
version online; and *GitHub Desktop* is a user-friendly program that
makes it easy to use both. (Or not: GH Desktop also works just fine
without sharing anything to the cloud.)

What makes this system different is that every change must be labeled in
order to be logged: the system prompts you to write a short summary
statement before it will enter it in the history. Git calls these
"commit messages," and the points in history "commits." I kind of love
the energy of that. It's like, "Okay, I know you've saved this file, but
are you ready to commit to it? Is this an official version you'd want to
look at again later?" Pausing to commit---even to decide *whether* to
commit---opens up a space for reflection *in the middle of the writing
process*. Committing asks me to record not only what's changed, but also
what the goal of changing it was. Commit messages can say what's new, or
what you're working on, or even what you're planning to do in the
future... or all three. (The structure of a commit message in git is one
short required header line, then as much optional text as you want below
that.) For my money, those pauses are where a lot of learning about
revision can happen.

To help you decide what to write, or whether to go back and make more
changes before you commit, GitHub Desktop's main view shows the status
of your changes: how many files are different from the previous commit,
and, for simple text or image files, exactly what has changed.^\[1\]^
Having the diffs right there helps me write the commit message in light
of the specific changes, and if I forget to commit at the end of a
working session, it reminds me of what I was in the middle of. (I've
taken advantage of that feature several times in the course of writing
this.)

![Screenshot of GitHub desktop. The right panel shows one paragraph
inserted; the left panel indicates that one file has changed. A commit
message reads, \"insert paragraph about how changes change,\" plus the
extra text, \"and do it fairly early (though I expect I\'ll want to call
back to it later)\"](media/image4.tif){width="6.5in"
height="4.361111111111111in"}

Figure 4. GitHub Desktop displays changes within a designated folder.
Any number of changed files may be added to a commit. The short headline
commit message is required; additional text (as at bottom left) is
optional. Screenshot by author of his own file.

Two important caveats, though. First, a git-based workflow encourages a
bit of reflection, but it doesn't enforce one. It's entirely possible to
write the required commit messages in a vacuous way, "draft 1," "draft
2," that don't help you at all to see what's changing when you glance
down the revision history. You have to actually look to see what's
actually changed, what's added, what's taken away, or if you're just
refining in place. (And then to decide whether that's what you wanted to
be doing at that moment.) The reflection isn't automatic.

![Screenshot of GitHub Desktop\'s history tab. Only the headlines of
most past commit messages are shown, but for the highlighted commit,
additional notes are displayed above the associated
diffs.](media/image5.tif){width="6.5in" height="4.361111111111111in"}

Figure 5. In GitHub Desktop\'s history view, the commit messages\'
headlines are prominently displayed; any additional text is shown only
one diff at a time. It's pretty important to write those headline
commits so that they're meaningful when you look back.

Second, the save itself isn't automatic, either: it's entirely possible
to make no commits at all between the first and final drafts. Until you
get in the habit of writing a commit message every time you save (or
stop working), it can be easy to forget. You'd end up with the same
truncated sense of the file's history as in the initial non-VCS
scenario. Then not only would you lose the traces of all your diffs,
you'd also lose text included in a middle draft but cut before the
final. (That cut material might still be useful in the future, for a
different audience or a different purpose. The time machine that version
control offers you the chance to retrieve those interim ideas.)

Wouldn't it be nice, then, if there were a way to combine Google Docs'
frequent automatic versioning with git's moments of midstream
reflection? In a way, there is: since 2017, Google Docs has allowed
users to name particular versions, and to filter the history to show
only named versions. You only get 80 characters, not multiple sentences,
and you won't be able to see the diffs as you're deciding on a name.
(This may lend itself more to descriptions of status, like "almost ready
for peer review," than to descriptions of changes, but you can still try
for something closer to "improved transition from source A to source
B.") But as compromises go, it's not a bad deal.

To sum up
---------

It's not always easy, in the thick of the writing or after pushing
through the thicket, to remember what turns you took, or why; sometimes
the new versions just replace what you'd done before, whether
figuratively in your memory or literally on your hard drive. Using
version control technology can help you track and make visible what
you're doing throughout the course of a writing project, so you can then
assess how your strategies have changed---and where they might be useful
again in the future.

Notes
-----

1.  Note the caveat there: you won't be able to see the latest diffs of
    a Microsoft Word file. (This is in part because Word files aren't
    just text: they're secretly a whole bunch of files compressed
    together. Try changing the extension from .docx to .zip and
    extracting to see what I mean.) But Markdown files, I've found, are
    pretty great for many of my writerly purposes, and work quite
    smoothly with all kinds of version control. And even if you're not
    ready to go that lo-fi, you can still write commit messages to help
    you find specific versions to go back and compare within Word. A
    good VCS will help you recover the files at those past points in
    time.

Works Cited
-----------

Chamberlain, Elizabeth. "Draftback to the Future:  A Tool for Writing
Process Analysis." *The Journal of Interactive Technology and Pedagogy*,
23 Apr. 2018,
https://jitp.commons.gc.cuny.edu/draftback-to-the-future-a-tool-for-writing-process-analysis/.

*Get Draftback to Play Back Google Docs*. http://draftback.com/.
Accessed 4 Sept. 2020.

*Git*. https://git-scm.com/. Accessed 5 Sept. 2020.

"GitHub Desktop." *GitHub Desktop*, https://desktop.github.com/.
Accessed 4 Sept. 2020.

*Named Versions: What You'll Love about the New Version History for
Google Docs - Google Apps Script Examples*.
https://sites.google.com/site/scriptsexamples/home/announcements/named-versions-new-version-history-google-docs.
Accessed 4 Sept. 2020.

Reid, E. Shelley. "Solving Writing Problems: Reframing What Writing
Teachers Know and Do." *WPA 2010 Conference Proceedings*, Council of
Writing Program Administrators, 2011, pp. 49--52,
http://wpacouncil.org/files/reid\--solving-writing-problems-78993.pdf.

Reid, E. Shelley. "Ten Ways To Think About Writing: Metaphoric Musings
for College Writing Students." *Writing Spaces: Readings on Writing.
Volume 1*, edited by Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky, Parlor Press,
2010. *Library of Congress ISBN*,
http://writingspaces.org/reid\--ten-ways-to-think.

Sommers, Nancy. "Revision Strategies of Student Writers and Experienced
Adult Writers." *College Composition and Communication*, vol. 31, no. 4,
Dec. 1980, pp. 378--88.

Stolley, Karl. "The Lo-Fi Manifesto, v. 2.0." *Kairos: A Journal of
Rhetoric, Technology, and Pedagogy*, vol. 20, no. 2, Jan. 2016,
http://kairos.technorhetoric.net/20.2/inventio/stolley/.

Wikipedia contributors. "Revision (Writing)." *Wikipedia*, Difference
between most recent revisions as of 05:19, 29 August 2020., 29 Aug.
2020. *Wikipedia*,
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Revision\_(writing)&oldid=975555839.

[Teacher Resources]{.smallcaps}

*Overview and Teaching Strategies*

This essay is intended to support students in making conscious
interventions in existing drafts, starting by exposing the specific
textual changes from one draft to another; as such, it would make sense
to assign it after students have already begun making some revisions. On
the other hand, it also encourages them to develop a writerly practice
of recording their revision intentions with each commit, i.e. each
difference they recognize as significant enough to put a label on. This
takes, well, practice, and so I would recommend starting relatively
early. Some feedback on commit messages may help students learn to write
them in a way that still makes sense when read weeks later. Even stating
that as a goal, and reminding students of that goal, seems to help over
time. Early on, it can be helpful to model the process in real time or
in a screencast.

I began using GitHub myself largely in response to Karl Stolley's "Lo-Fi
Manifesto 2.0," quoted in the epigraph. I have mostly taught version
control in the context of digital media composition courses, and in that
context I've strongly encouraged students to use git or GitHub Desktop.
But even in more text-based first-year composition courses, I've long
used wiki platforms as course websites (I like Wikidot), rather than my
universities' default Learning Management Systems, in large part because
of the way revision history is already built in: I encourage students to
use the same page to post early, middle, and revised drafts, and to
attach meaningful notes when revising.

*Questions after a first reading*

1.  The figures in this chapter include a variety of "commit messages."
    Which messages tell you the most about the goals or the content of
    the revision? Which tell you the least?

2.  

*Supporting Activities*

3.  Look at your own diffs. In terms of the scales and revision
    operations identified by Nancy Sommers (

4.  Trade revision histories with a partner, and read through the
    top-line messages. Can you tell what they were changing? At what
    scale (phrase, sentence, paragraph, section) would you expect to see
    those changes? Note particularly clear messages, where you get a
    sense not only of what changed, but why: what the goal of that
    revision was for your partner; also note any vague messages, that
    tell you something changed, but not what.

5.  
